[About](Project.html)

# Using Fluorometer Measurements to Gather Verifiable Chlorophyll A Concentration Data

### *Manatee County Natural Resources Department-Environmental Protection Division; Intern Brendan McKnight*

Here in Manatee county, water quality of our waterways is very important to us. We have two water quality monitoring programs that assess the most important waterways throughout the county, with about half being inland locations and half being out in the bay. These sites are assessed monthly, however this does not provide the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) with enough data to conduct investigations into the causes and effects of nutrient loading/eutrophication, and what can be done to reduce it. In order to assess eutrophication, the concentration of chlorophyll a, a pigment contained in the algae responsible for blooming, must be determined. The current method approved by the EPA to determine chlorophyll a concentration involves taking a sample from the field, and bringing it back to the lab for hours of preparation and testing. Despite this, fluorometers exist that carry the capabilities to determine the chlorophyll a concentration in an environment by emitting light and recording the light response made by the algae in the water. Unfortunately, due to their lack of accuracy, they are not approved as a method of collecting verifiable chlorophyll a concentrations. They are however very precise, and with the ability to correct the accuracy of such readings, the possibility for a new method to collect data on eutrophication is possible. This is the practical goal of this project, to collect enough data comparing field and lab analyzed results in the hopes of calculating a correction factor for in-vivo fluorometer readings that qualify them as verified data. If this is achieved, the EPD can gather data regarding eutrophication remarkably faster and more frequently allowing us to investigate more thoroughly the issues causing eutrophication in our county's waterways. With this ability, the EPD would be able to report on the severity of causes of nutrient loading as well as be able to compare the effectiveness of different efforts being made to reduce nutrient loading. By using the technology we already have at our footsteps, we may be able to make a lasting effect in the scientific community that is concerned with eutrophication, and help our precious environments that are being put at risk.

Use this page to learn more about this project by visiting the multiple tabs at the top. This project is ongoing so for now the currents pages are: About, Data, Collection Site Map. As the project progresses over it's span of ten weeks, the contents and tabs will be changed and added to as it works to become a site for the findings and results of this project.
